Add pipelines pages to experimens start guide (#4420)
iterative/dvc.org: content/docs/start/experiments/building-pipelines.md

into
[`data_split.py`](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started-experiments/blob/main/src/data_split.py).
We parametrize this script by reading parameters from
[`params.yaml`](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started-experiments/blob/main/params.yaml):

```python
from ruamel.yaml import YAML

yaml = YAML(typ="safe")

def data_split():
    params = yaml.load(open("params.yaml", encoding="utf-8"))
...
```

You can use `dvc stage add` to transform a script into a <abbr>stage</abbr>:

```cli
$ dvc stage add --name data_split \
  --params base,data_split \
  --deps data/pool_data --deps src/data_split.py \
  --outs data/train_data --outs data/test_data \
  python src/data_split.py
```

A `dvc.yaml` file is generated. It includes information about the command you
want to run (`python src/data_split.py`), its <abbr>dependencies</abbr>,
<abbr>parameters</abbr>, and <abbr>outputs</abbr>:

```yaml
stages:
  prepare:
    cmd: python src/data_split.py
    deps:
      - src/data_split.py
      - data/pool_data
    params:
      - base
      - data_split
    outs:
      - data/train_data
      - data/test_data
```

> `dvc exp run` will run all stages in the `dvc.yaml` file.

Reviewer: > Not blocking: 
> 
> Do you think is worth adding a ```console block showing a simplified output (like the `Running stage `data_split`...)
> 
> Commenting mostly because of the paragraph bellow where you introduce the skip/cache

_Originally posted by @daavoo in https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/4425#discussion_r1147312631_

Reviewer: Pushed some changes related to your feedback. PTAL. Not sure if it is getting too long/detailed already.

Author: > Not sure if it is getting too long/detailed already.

The changes look good to me. And it is getting too long indeed but I don't see what we can omit without losing too much context.

This is why I originally couldn't stop myself from decoupling `Pipelines` completely 😅 .

Maybe we can revisit the idea as a follow-up.

<admon type="info">

Learn more about [Stages](/doc/user-guide/pipelines/defining-pipelines#stages)

</admon>

## Building a DAG

By using `dvc stage add` multiple times and defining <abbr>outputs</abbr> of a
stage as <abbr>dependencies</abbr> of another, you describe a sequence of
commands which forms a
[pipeline](https://dvc.org/doc/user-guide/pipelines/defining-pipelines), also
called a [DAG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph).

Let's create a `train` stage using
[`train.py`](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started-experiments/blob/main/src/train.py)
to train the model:

```cli
$ dvc stage add -n train \
  -p base,train \
  -d src/train.py -d data/train_data \
  -o models/model.pkl \
  python src/train.py
```

`dvc exp run` checks the `prepare` stage first and then the `train` stage since
it depends on the <abbr>outputs</abbr> of `prepare`. If you already ran
`prepare` with the same <abbr>dependencies</abbr> and <abbr>parameters</abbr>,
it will be retrieved from the [run cache](/doc/user-guide/pipelines/run-cache)

> and skipped.

Reviewer: > Not blocking:
> 
> Do you think is worth differentiating between retrieving from the cache and skipping because nothing changed?
> Maybe is obvious but we don't mention the skipping if nothing changed

_Originally posted by @daavoo in https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/4425#discussion_r1147313995_

Reviewer: I originally mentioned skipping because nothing changes, but then decided to copy your text from the next page to link to the run cache. I don't think we should explain both/differentiate in the get started, although maybe in the guide it's worth it. I think it's probably better to make it general here. WDYT?

Author: > lthough maybe in the guide it's worth it. I think it's probably better to make it general here. WDYT?

Sounds good. 
Let's remember to cover it in the guide.

    deps:
      - src/data_split.py
      - data/pool_data
    params:
      - base
      - data_split
    outs:
      - data/train_data
      - data/test_data
```

`dvc exp run` will run all stages in the `dvc.yaml` file:

```cli
$ dvc exp run
'data/pool_data.dvc' didn't change, skipping
Running stage 'data_split':
> python src/data_split.py
Generating lock file 'dvc.lock'
Updating lock file 'dvc.lock'
...
```

<admon type="info">

Learn more about [Stages](/doc/user-guide/pipelines/defining-pipelines#stages)

</admon>

## Building a DAG

By using `dvc stage add` multiple times and defining <abbr>outputs</abbr> of a
stage as <abbr>dependencies</abbr> of another, you describe a sequence of
commands which forms a
[pipeline](https://dvc.org/doc/user-guide/pipelines/defining-pipelines), also
called a [DAG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph).

Let's create a `train` stage using
[`train.py`](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started-experiments/blob/main/src/train.py)
to train the model:

```cli
$ dvc stage add -n train \
  -p base,train \
  -d src/train.py -d data/train_data \
  -o models/model.pkl \
  python src/train.py
```

> `dvc exp run` checks the `prepare` stage first and then the `train` stage since

Author: ```suggestion
`dvc exp run` checks the `data_split` stage first and then the `train` stage since
```

> `dvc exp run` checks the `prepare` stage first and then the `train` stage since
> it depends on the <abbr>outputs</abbr> of `prepare`. If a stage has not changed

Author: ```suggestion
`dvc exp run` checks the `data_split` stage first and then the `train` stage since
it depends on the <abbr>outputs</abbr> of `data_split`. If a stage has not changed
```

---
title: 'Get Started: Building Pipelines'
description:
  'Split your workflow into stages and build a pipeline by connecting
  dependencies and outputs.'
---

> # Get Started: Building Pipelines

Author: I updated the intro. Please TAL

Once you start consolidating your project and the code structure, the
flexibility of the notebooks might start to lose its value and some parts of the
workflow could be improved.

DVC <abbr>Pipelines</abbr> can help you standardize your workflow following
software engineering best practices while also enabling new features like:

- [Preventing steps to be recomputed](/doc/user-guide/pipelines/run-cache).
- [Modifying parameters from the CLI](/doc/user-guide/experiment-management/running-experiments#tuning-hyperparameters).
- [Queueing and executing multiple experiments at once](/doc/user-guide/experiment-management/running-experiments#the-experiments-queue).

> - [Configuring your project with Hydra](/doc/user-guide/experiment-management/running-experiments#hydra-composition).

Author: I think it makes sense but we need to prioritize https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/issues/4401 as a follow-up

> - [Configuring your project with Hydra](/doc/user-guide/experiment-management/running-experiments#hydra-composition).

Author: I ended up removing the mention of enabling new features but I could add it back

## From notebook to scripts

We are not going to cover here how to go from notebooks to scripts, but you can
follow
[this detailed blog post](https://towardsdatascience.com/from-jupyter-notebook-to-sc-582978d3c0c)

> to learn how to do it.

Author: Is your concern about space usage? We could add it in a admon block but I think it would take almost as much space

- **Parametrize**: adapt your scripts to decouple the configuration from the
  source code.

All these scripts are configured using different sections of the
[`params.yaml`](https://github.com/iterative/example-get-started-experiments/blob/main/params.yaml)
file.

## Creating stages

You can use `dvc stage add` to transform a script into a <abbr>stage</abbr>:

```cli
$ dvc stage add -n data_split \
  -p base,data_split \
  -d data/pool_data -d src/data_split.py \
  -o data/train_data -o data/test_data \
  python src/data_split.py
```

A `dvc.yaml` file is generated. It includes information about the command you
want to run (`python src/data_split.py`), its <abbr>dependencies</abbr>,
<abbr>parameters</abbr>, and <abbr>outputs</abbr>:

```yaml
stages:
  prepare:
    cmd: python src/data_split.py
    deps:
      - src/data_split.py
      - data/pool_data
    params:
      - base
      - data_split
    outs:
      - data/train_data
      - data/test_data
```

DVC uses these metafiles to track the data used and produced by the stage, so
there's no need to use `dvc add` on `data/train_data` or `data/test_data`
[manually](/doc/start/data-management/data-versioning).

> 

Author: Not saying that it is the perfect get started but when looking at other examples like:

https://docs.dagster.io/getting-started/hello-dagster#step-1-create-hello-dagsterpy

It is more along the lines of what I would expect from a get started: Show me the snippet, give me links to learn more, and don't bother me with details for now.

To be fair, that example might be too far on the opposite side of the spectrum as it just uses decorators, custom classes, pandas usage without any context at all. 😅

> ## Building a DAG

Author: > Realistically, I think anyone would want to run the first stage before adding more. I think it also highlights the incremental approach of DVC pipelines, which makes them less intimidating. It feels like it's trying to save `dvc exp run` for the next section rather than focusing on a realistic workflow.

Could you expand a little more on the reasoning?
I don't really understand why running the unfinished pipeline would make it less intimidating and why it would be a more realistic workflow.

By using `dvc stage add` multiple times and defining <abbr>outputs</abbr> of a
stage as <abbr>dependencies</abbr> of another, you describe a sequence of
commands which gets to some desired result. This is called a
[DAG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph).

Let's create 2 additional stages one for training and the other for evaluating
the model:

```cli
$ dvc stage add -n train \
  -p base,train \
  -d src/train.py -d data/train_data \
  -o models/model.pkl \
  --metrics-no-cache results/train/metrics.json \
  --plots-no-cache results/train/plots \
  python src/train.py
```

> 

Author: Let's discuss the topic in https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/4420#discussion_r1143970837
